---
layout: post
title: Generating XML documentation
tags: []
---
<p style="color:gray">1 June 2023 by <a href='mailto:r.bouckaert@auckland.ac.nz'>Remco Bouckaert</a></p>


For BEAST 2 XML, most elements (with a few exceptions, such as the top-level `beast` element, and `map`  and `plate` elements) has a java class associated with it, specified in the `spec` attribute.
Since packages are continually being updated, it is not feasible to keep documentation up-to-date, so it can be handy to generate your own for the packages you have installed.

## Documenting v2.7 XML

Documentation can be automatically generated using `DocMaker`, which is part of the `BEAST.app` package. 
For each BEAST class, a html page will be generated containing a description of the class (i.e `spec` attribute) and its inputs (i.e. XML attributes or nested elements), and some information about types of inputs and whether inputs are required.
It will produce documentation for classes of installed packages as well: any class declared as a BEASTInterface service in the version.xml file that comes with packages will get its own html page.

`DocMaker` is an app that can be launched with the `AppLauncher` that comes with BEAST, or via the command line using


```
/path/to/beast/bin/applauncher DocMaker /output/dir
```

where `/path/to/beast` the path to where you have BEAST installed, and `/output/dir` the directory to where html files should go.
An `index.html` file is generated in `/output/dir` that contains a page similar to the one on the [online manual](http://www.beast2.org/xml/index.html).
Further, for each class a page is generated documenting that class.

Technical note: All information is obtained through introspection from the `@Description` annotation of classes and `Input`s of each class.





## Documenting v2.6 XML

DocMaker behaves slightly different in BEAST v2.6.X, but produces similar output to DocMaker v2.7. To generate documentation for BEAST v2.6.X, run

```
java -cp /path/to/beast/lib/beast.jar beast.app.DocMaker /output/dir
```

where `/path/to/beast` the path to where you have BEAST installed, and `/output/dir` the directory to where html files should go. 


DocMaker in v2.6.X only documents classes in the `beast` and `snap` namespace, due to this [line](https://github.com/CompEvol/beast2/blob/6fa2b7f877ba103ebf90c62c209417947a0aea96/src/beast/app/DocMaker.java#L92), so it behaves a bit difference than the v2.7 version, since only a subset of classes are considered.

For developers, if you change

```
m_beastObjectNames = PackageManager.find(beast.core.BEASTObject.class, PackageManager.IMPLEMENTATION_DIR);
```

to

```
m_beastObjectNames = PackageManager.find(beast.core.BEASTObject.class, new String[]{"beast", "xyz"});
```

in the `v2.6` (not the `master`) branch, it should pick up classes in the `beast` as well as ``xyz` namespace, where `xyz` is the namespace you want to include. You can add as many namespaces as needed.

